\chapter{Introduction}\label{ch:intro}

Every new generation of cellular network technologies comes with a new set of
requirements, dictated by the trends in the use of the mobile connectivity. One
common requirement in every generation is to obtain higher data rates and
greater power efficiency. The requirement motivates research and technology
innovation in order to achieve the goals set for each generation.

The research associated usually requires revisiting old paradigms used in
previous generations, and updating them with novel ideas.


\emph{Release 7} of the \gls{3gpp} \gls{3g} specifications \cite{3gpprel7},
also known as \gls{hspa+}, included the use of \gls{mimo} as a means to increase
the transmission rates.


\emph{Release 8}, more well known by its commercial name \gls{lte}
\cite{3gpplte}, introduced a new physical layer, based on \gls{ofdm} instead of
\gls{wcdma} as in \gls{3g}. Although the rates attainable with \gls{wcdma} may
be comparable to those obtained with \gls{ofdm}, the latter provides a much
easier equalization mechanism that makes dealing with multipath channels a
simpler task. Apart from that, \gls{ofdm} provides a higher flexibility in the
resource allocation and enables the use of \gls{ofdma}.

However, \gls{lte} did not meet the requirements issued by the \gls{itur}
\gls{imta} radio interface \cite{imta} for what is known as \gls{4g}.

The introduction of \gls{ltea} in \emph{release 10} of the LTE specification
\cite{3gppltea} met the requirements to be considered an \gls{imta} system. The
main novelties included in \gls{ltea} are \gls{ca}, enhanced use of MIMO
techniques and support for \glspl{rn}.

\emph{Release 11} \cite{3gpprel11} included in its specification the support for
\gls{comp} operation. \gls{comp} was considered in order to improve the network
performance at cell edges, for it uses several transmitters to provide
coordinated transmission in the downlink, and a number of receivers to provide
coordinated reception in the uplink.

With \gls{ltea} standardized and its deployment already ongoing, further
releases of \gls{ltea} still continue but standards bodies and industry are
already looking to the future \gls{5g}, as is doing the research world. Even
though there is no definite idea about what \gls{5g} will be, it is clear what
it will \emph{not} be: an incremental advance on \gls{4g}. It needs to be a
paradigm shift \cite{andrews14}.

The new \gls{5g} systems will be characterized by being heterogeneous, formally 
known as \glspl{hetnet}, formed by multiple small cells, using different radio
access technologies \cite{chin14}. One of the main problems for \glspl{hetnet}
is inter-cell interference, because of the possible presence of unplanned
deployment of small cells, and the irregular shape of the cells. Hence the importance of interference coordination techniques.

\begin{figure}[t]
    \centering
    \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.45\textwidth}
            \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./01.introduction/img/frequency_reuse}
        \caption{Frequency reuse factor of $1 / 7$.}
        \label{fig:freuse}
    \end{subfigure}
    % Comment out the line break that is introduced with the blank line
    % so that it does not put the images one on top of the other...
    \begin{subfigure}[b]{0.45\textwidth}
        \includegraphics[width=\textwidth]{./01.introduction/img/universal_freq_reuse}
        \caption{Frequency reuse factor of $1$.}
        \label{fig:ufreuse}
    \end{subfigure}
    \caption{Different frequency planning options}
    \label{fig:freq_plan}
\end{figure}

Current \gls{mimo} systems used in cellular networks are not achieving the
expected performance predicted by the initial theoretical works. The main reason
for this is the interference that is present naturally in cellular systems when
all cells share the same spectrum for the tranmissions. The effect of this
interference is a reduction of the \gls{sinr} experienced by the users, highly
reducing the advantages that \gls{mimo} could potentially deliver.

The conventional approach for cellular networks was to carefully plan the
allocation of frequencies in order to avoid the interference among neighboring
cells.  Clusters of $N$ cells were grouped together, and assigned $N$ frequency
bands to be used, and the pattern is repeated for different clusters, yielding
what is called a \emph{frequency reuse factor} of $1/N$, as exemplified in
\reff{fig:freuse}.

The problem that this poses is that the available spectrum must be split, which
is an inherent inefficiency in the use of the resources.

A different option consists of a system where all the cells share a common
spectrum, so that all of them can use the full amount of resources available.
This is called \gls{ufr}, and a graphical description can be seen in
\reff{fig:ufreuse}.

It is in this kind of network that the need for coordination among cells arises,
as every cell will interfere with the rest of the cells in the system, reducing
the \gls{sinr} operating point of the users.

In the search for higher data rates and a more efficient use of the resources,
\gls{ufr} is needed make the most out of the scarce radio frequency spectrum.
Therefore, ``a new look at the interference'' \cite{gesbert10} is needed. The
conventional concept of the interference as an impairment needs to shift to a
new viewpoint where the interference can be used to improve the overall
performance of the network. A joint optimization of the resources among all the
cells is required in order to globally improve the perfomance of the system
\cite{gesbert07}.

The \gls{comp} operation considered in \cite{3gpprel11} is just a part of a much
broader field of multicell cooperation or coordinated communications where
several cells are assumed to cooperate, in the sense that they take measures to
alleviate the level of interference introduced into other parts of the network
to a certain degree, or the use of that interference to their advantage.

Intuitively, the best strategy should be to allow all the \glspl{bs} in the
network to cooperate, in what is known as \emph{global coordination}. Even
though it may seem that global coordination could solve all the problems of
frequency planning and resource allocation, it cannot be ignored that it comes
at a non-negligible cost. The \glspl{bs} in the network may need to interchange
information in order to cooperatively transmit the data to all the users in the
system. The amount of information that needs to be exchanged becomes
unmanageable with the size of the network, \ie the number of \glspl{bs} that
form the system. The result of this is that the capacity required to transmit
this information renders the alleged solution useless. Not only are the backhaul
transmission capabilities required prohibitive, but also tight synchronization
among the \glspl{bs} becomes a challenge, and channel information gathering
becomes a cumbersome task. Apart from this, theoretical works \cite{lozano13}
have unveiled intrinsic limitations of cooperation, whose benefits do not
unboundedly grow with the size of the coordination group.

For all these reasons, clustering appears as a means to cope with the
limitations of global coordination. In clustering, the coordination is not
performed among all the \glspl{bs} in the network but, instead, small groups, or
clusters, are formed and the cooperation takes place locally within the cluster.
This greatly reduces the amount of control information that should be handled by
the backhaul. Also, the reduced size of the group makes the system work at an
operating point where the natural limitations mentioned in \cite{lozano13} do
not affect the performance of the network.

\begin{figure}[t]
    \centering
    \includegraphics[width=0.45\textwidth]{./01.introduction/img/clustered_network}
    \caption{Clustered network scenario.}
    \label{fig:clustered_network}
\end{figure}

A schematic representation of a clustered network can be seen in
\reff{fig:clustered_network} where three clusters of seven cells are shown.

Grouping the cells in reduced size clusters has an important drawback: if the
cooperation is done within a cluster and neighboring clusters are not
coordinated in any way, there would be, again, unhandled interference, albeit
not the same as in the uncoordinated scenario.

This thesis focuses on a clustered cellular network where \gls{bd} is used for
coordination within each cluster. The performance of the network, in terms of
achievable rate and fairness considerations, is analyzed, and its dependence on
several parameters of the network is studied. Also, mechanisms to deal with the
interference, resulting from clustering, are presented.

The main contributions of this thesis are:

\begin{itemize}
    \item \fullcite{corvaja13b}
    \item \fullcite{corvaja14}
    \item \fullcite{jjgarcia14}
\end{itemize}

The organization of the present document is as follows:

\begin{itemize}
    \item In \refc{ch:state_art} a compilation of different alternatives for
        coordination, as well as for clustering, found in the literature are
        presented and described.
    \item \refc{ch:system_model} presents the system model used throughout the
        dissertation, and describes in detail \gls{bd} and the power allocation
        strategies used in the rest of the work.
    \item \refc{ch:achiev_rates} analyzes the performance of a cellular network,
        in terms of the mean achievable rate as a function of the cluster size,
        when using \gls{bd} for coordination within each cluster, and taking
        into account the interference due to external clusters. An analytical
        expression for the mean achievable rate is developed and the optimum
        cluster size is obtained.
    \item \refc{ch:rate_statistics} considers the fairness of the system, and
        studies the variability of the rate, as a complement to the mean
        obtained in \refc{ch:achiev_rates}. The behavior of the rates is shown
        to follow almost exactly a Gamma distribution.
    \item The pernicious effect of the \gls{oci} in the rates is introduced in
        \refc{ch:adaptive_schedule}, and a mechanism to deal with it, based on
        a mixed transmission strategy and on a scheduling algorithm, is
        presented.
    \item Finally, some concluding remarks and future research lines are
        discussed in \refc{ch:conclusions_and_future}.
\end{itemize}
